Integrate SPIFFE client and Keycloak dev services (#55673)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-spiffe-client.adoc

        spiffeClient.setPublicClient(false);
        spiffeClient.setServiceAccountsEnabled(true);
        spiffeClient.setStandardFlowEnabled(true);
        spiffeClient.setClientAuthenticatorType("federated-jwt");
        spiffeClient.setRedirectUris(List.of("*"));
        spiffeClient.setEnabled(true);
        spiffeClient.setAttributes(Map.of(
                "jwt.credential.issuer", "spiffe-idp",
                "jwt.credential.sub", "spiffe://test.quarkus.io/test-workload"));
        realm.getClients().add(spiffeClient);

        client.createRealm(realm);
        return Map.of();
    }

    @Override
    public void stop() {
    }
}
----

Next, adjust your application configuration to enable the SPIFFE feature in Keycloak Dev Services.
The SPIFFE Dev Service bundle endpoint listens on port `18443` by default, and Keycloak must be able to reach it:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.host-accessible-ports=${quarkus.spiffe-client.devservices.http-port}
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.features=spiffe
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.realm-name=quarkus-spiffe
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.create-realm=false
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.create-client=false

> ----

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Somewhere here, we should probably advise users who have existing realms (which would be rather typical I guess) with spiffe enabled, that they need to add
```
idp.setConfig(Map.of(
                "trustDomain", "spiffe://test.quarkus.io",
                "bundleEndpoint", "http://host.testcontainers.internal:18443/bundle"));
``` 

to test it with Quarkus, either temporarily in the existing realm or they can copy it to the test realm and update there

Reviewer: please check if `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.create-client=false` isneeded if `create-realm=false`, I think not, but please double check.

If you add this note about custom realms then please also show an alternative config like

```
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.host-accessible-ports=${quarkus.spiffe-client.devservices.http-port}
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.features=spiffe
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.realm-path=quarkus-spiffe.json
```

Author: > please check if quarkus.keycloak.devservices.create-client=false isneeded if create-realm=false, I think not, but please double check.

Yes, it was needed, I fixed it so that it is not needed anymore.

> @michalvavrik Somewhere here, we should probably advise users who have existing realms (which would be rather typical I guess) with spiffe enabled, that they need to add

but right now `KeycloakTestClient` only supports creating the realm, not updating it. I think we would need to add a new method to the client or just hardcode "updateRealm" (or patch) method or something like that. For now, I only added example how to add the SPIFFE idp to realm json. Let's have a look.

I am absolutely open to documenting / doing it another way if you prefer. Let me know.

Author: I could create follow-up with modification to `KeycloakTestClient` (adding the realm update), but I'll wait for you feedback in case you have different preference.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik I'm not sure users will want to use keycloak test client to update their realms, my proposal was only to tell users that if they have an existing realm then they need to add to it (in KC dashboard) this callback property

Reviewer: @michalvavrik There might be some interesting cases though where updating realms can be useful for tests, good idea, please keep it on your map, it is not a high priority though IMHO

Author: > @michalvavrik I'm not sure users will want to use keycloak test client to update their realms, my proposal was only to tell users that if they have an existing realm then they need to add to it (in KC dashboard) this callback property

sure, I tried to address it with the JSON example, if you prefer that Java map you gave, I can switch to that. it is no problem, I just couldn't give plausible example how to use that Java map.

> @michalvavrik There might be some interesting cases though where updating realms can be useful for tests, good idea, please keep it on your map, it is not a high priority though IMHO

I just suggested it to improve this example, I don't think it is important. IMO we should improve auto-setup rather than improving such documentation how to adjust realm manually, but let's not go there now!

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Yes, please follow up at some later stage to try to make it much simpler

return spiffeClient.getWorkloadJsonWebToken("https://other-service.example.com").map(WorkloadJsonWebToken::token);
----

== OIDC SPIFFE Client Authentication

> When combined with `quarkus-oidc` or `quarkus-oidc-client`, this extension can supply JWT-SVIDs as client assertions automatically:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When this extension is combined with either `quarkus-oidc` or `quarkus-oidc-client` extensions, JWT-SVIDs can be supplied automatically and used as OIDC client authentication assertions.
```

Author: done

> * To authenticate the OIDC provider client during the authorization code exchange, see the xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc#oidc-provider-client-authentication[OIDC provider client authentication] section of the OIDC code flow guide.

Reviewer: IMHO we don't need to distinguish between OIDC provider client, OIDC client, this is an internal differentiation. Please only link to corresponding sections. Something like

```
Please see the xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc#oidc-provider-client-authentication[OIDC provider client authentication] section of the OIDC code flow authentication guide and the xref:security-openid-connect-client-reference.adoc#oidc-client-authentication[OIDC Client authentication] section of the OIDC client guide for more information.
```

Author: done

* To authenticate an `OidcClient` for `client_credentials` or other grant types, see the xref:security-openid-connect-client-reference.adoc#oidc-client-authentication[OidcClient authentication] section of the OIDC client reference.

== Testing

In dev and test modes, the extension provides a Dev Service that emulates the SPIFFE Workload API with a pre-configured identity and a locally generated key pair.
While it does not support custom authorization policies or registration entries, it is sufficient for verifying that your application correctly retrieves and uses JWT-SVIDs without requiring external SPIRE infrastructure.
You can choose the transport protocol with the `quarkus.spiffe-client.devservices.transport` property, which accepts `unix` (default) or `tcp`.

[[keycloak-dev-svc-integration]]
=== Testing SPIFFE client authentication with Keycloak

To test OIDC SPIFFE client authentication against Keycloak Dev Services, you need to configure a Keycloak realm with a SPIFFE identity provider and a `federated-jwt` client. 
You can automate this setup by creating a custom test resource using `KeycloakTestClient`. This ensures the realm is ready before your tests execute.

> [source,java]

Reviewer: Please add something like `For example, you can create a test realm like this:`

Author: done

        idp.setEnabled(true);
        idp.setConfig(Map.of(
                "trustDomain", "spiffe://test.quarkus.io",
                "bundleEndpoint", "http://host.testcontainers.internal:18443/bundle"));
        realm.addIdentityProvider(idp);

        ClientRepresentation spiffeClient = new ClientRepresentation();
        spiffeClient.setClientId("my-app");
        spiffeClient.setPublicClient(false);
        spiffeClient.setServiceAccountsEnabled(true);
        spiffeClient.setStandardFlowEnabled(true);
        spiffeClient.setClientAuthenticatorType("federated-jwt");
        spiffeClient.setRedirectUris(List.of("*"));
        spiffeClient.setEnabled(true);
        spiffeClient.setAttributes(Map.of(
                "jwt.credential.issuer", "spiffe-idp",
                "jwt.credential.sub", "spiffe://test.quarkus.io/test-workload"));
        realm.getClients().add(spiffeClient);

        client.createRealm(realm);
        return Map.of();
    }

    @Override
    public void stop() {
    }
}
----

Next, adjust your application configuration to enable the SPIFFE feature in Keycloak Dev Services and align the communication ports:

[source,properties]
----

> quarkus.spiffe-client.devservices.http-port=18443

Reviewer: I'm not sure why users need to come up with this port

Author: > I'm not sure why users need to come up with this port

So that they know it. You stopped me from adding any relationship between SPIFFE and Keycloak Dev Service, hence users need to do it manually.

Author: I'm offering to pre-set this for users for some fixed port we pick here https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/55673#discussion_r3792040795 as alternative. If this is an issue, well, only remaining option is what you want, that is add this as route to Quarkus app.

Author: now this property don't need to be set, have a look (I hope it won't make PR CI flaky...)

        spiffeClient.setAttributes(Map.of(
                "jwt.credential.issuer", "spiffe-idp",
                "jwt.credential.sub", "spiffe://test.quarkus.io/test-workload"));
        realm.getClients().add(spiffeClient);

        client.createRealm(realm);
        return Map.of();
    }

    @Override
    public void stop() {
    }
}
----

Next, adjust your application configuration to enable the SPIFFE feature in Keycloak Dev Services.
The SPIFFE Dev Service bundle endpoint listens on port `18443` by default, and Keycloak must be able to reach it:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.host-accessible-ports=${quarkus.spiffe-client.devservices.http-port}
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.features=spiffe
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.realm-name=quarkus-spiffe
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.create-realm=false
----

Finally, apply this setup to your test class using the `@QuarkusTestResource` annotation:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.test.common.QuarkusTestResource;
import io.quarkus.test.junit.QuarkusTest;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

@QuarkusTest
@QuarkusTestResource(SpiffeKeycloakTestResource.class)
class MySpiffeClientTest {

    @Test

>     void testClientAuthentication() {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    void testEndpointThatReliesOnSpiffeClientAuthentication() {
```

may be it is a bit verbose but users write integration tests to test some application endpoints, so it may be a bit confusing if we say test client authentication which would probably belong in the KC test suite

>         // Test logic that relies on Keycloak SPIFFE client authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        // Test application endpoint that relies on Keycloak SPIFFE client authentication
```

    }
}
----

[[existing-realm]]

> === Using an existing realm

Reviewer: @michalvavrik This becomes a sibling of the parent section,

`=== Testing SPIFFE client authentication with Keycloak`
`=== Using an existing realm`

and it is also sitting after the code example.

IMHO we don;t need a new section to clarify how to handle an existing realm, just let it flow after the create realm example,  but before `Finally, apply this setup to your test class using the `@QuarkusTestResource` annotation:`

Author: > @michalvavrik This becomes a sibling of the parent section,
> 
> `=== Testing SPIFFE client authentication with Keycloak` `=== Using an existing realm`
> 
> and it is also sitting after the code example.
> 
> IMHO we don;t need a new section to clarify how to handle an existing realm, just let it flow after the create realm example, but before `Finally, apply this setup to your test class using the `@QuarkusTestResource` annotation:`

that was wrong, thanks for catching it

> To reuse an existing realm, export it to a JSON file and set the SPIFFE identity provider's `trustDomain` to `spiffe://test.quarkus.io` and `bundleEndpoint` to `http://host.testcontainers.internal:18443/bundle`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternativily, if you already have an existing realm, export it to a JSON file and set the SPIFFE identity provider's `trustDomain` to `spiffe://test.quarkus.io` and `bundleEndpoint` to `http://host.testcontainers.internal:18443/bundle`.
```

and please add all this existing realm related content just above `Finally, apply this setup to your test class using the @QuarkusTestResource annotation:`

When combined with `quarkus-oidc` or `quarkus-oidc-client`, this extension can supply JWT-SVIDs as client assertions automatically:

* To authenticate the OIDC provider client during the authorization code exchange, see the xref:security-oidc-code-flow-authentication.adoc#oidc-provider-client-authentication[OIDC provider client authentication] section of the OIDC code flow guide.
* To authenticate an `OidcClient` for `client_credentials` or other grant types, see the xref:security-openid-connect-client-reference.adoc#oidc-client-authentication[OidcClient authentication] section of the OIDC client reference.

== Testing

In dev and test modes, the extension provides a Dev Service that emulates the SPIFFE Workload API with a pre-configured identity and a locally generated key pair.
While it does not support custom authorization policies or registration entries, it is sufficient for verifying that your application correctly retrieves and uses JWT-SVIDs without requiring external SPIRE infrastructure.
You can choose the transport protocol with the `quarkus.spiffe-client.devservices.transport` property, which accepts `unix` (default) or `tcp`.

[[keycloak-dev-svc-integration]]

> === SPIFFE integration with Dev Services for Keycloak

Reviewer: This is only relevant though in scope of the OIDC SPIFFE Client authentication, right ?

Author: > This is only relevant though in scope of the OIDC SPIFFE Client authentication, right ?

yes, but not sure what you mean, can you elaborate bit more? we have a test section and we have an OIDC section, so I moved the OIDC section before a test section because I wanted the OIDC integration to be already introduced. But if I put it under OIDC, it will be weird because it is a test or dev stuff, or do you see it differently?

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure - right now what we really allow to test is that keycloak spiffe fed works. We don't have support for workload identity fed yet for ex at the REST client filter that I plan to look at so not clear what the application can test outside of the the spiffe client authentication.

Author: > I'm not 100% sure - right now what we really allow to test is that keycloak spiffe fed works. We don't have support for workload identity fed yet for ex at the REST client filter that I plan to look at so not clear what the application can test outside of the the spiffe client authentication.

I'll wait until you answer here https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/55673#discussion_r3664437277, because I am probably missing something, I think we a allow to test exactly what users need - bearer token auth and code flow while client is authenticated using client assertion with SPIFFE.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Sorry, right, I got confused. But, it is still true that so far the only use case that we test is OIDC Spiffe client authentication specific...

Author: > @michalvavrik Sorry, right, I got confused. But, it is still true that so far the only use case that we test is OIDC Spiffe client authentication specific...

yes

When Keycloak Dev Services are enabled with `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.features=spiffe`, the SPIFFE dev service bundle endpoint is automatically exposed to the Keycloak container.
This lets you configure a SPIFFE identity provider in your realm JSON file using a `${SPIFFE_BUNDLE_ENDPOINT}` placeholder that is resolved before the realm is imported:

[source,json]

> ----

Reviewer: I'm not sure Michal that this is what we want to recommend, show this fragment and have it copied to the realm file to save. This Realm JSON is pretty low level and has only a spiffe setup, so it is not enough to support a user login to the quarkus application. Without it, we just test keycloak spiffe fed only.

Keycloak Spiffe fed test should go alongside a typical web-app test, a user logs in, quarkus oidc web-app using OIDC SPIFFE client authentication to complete the code flow.  

So, IMHO, we should consider some of the following options:

* Show a typical custom test factory, nearly similar to what you did, but that depends on KC to launch container and that use RealmRepresentation to create an identity provider - possibly similar to the client attestation approach - as it looks very similar   
* May be a better option: we should let Keycloak do the default realm creation - but disable the client creation - and use the test factory to add only two more entities - spiffe identity provider to the default realm and a new client
* May we can also evolve further with supporting identity provider setups - ex, `IdentityProvider` that has a Map config, and we can also support client attributes maps (client id - to Map of atributes) and have a list of `IdentityProvider` and say it only works for the default realm (for now)   

It may not be ideal either, but we'll get an integrated testing for Quarkus and Spiffe client auth; option 3 seems useful on its own...

Not clear how to make it work with custom realms - but we'll worry about it later

Author: I hope I don't misinterpret it, but grok is: let them do it manually via test resource or (even new) config properties

That will work. I think my version was better, and I would go way further and just pre-configure it for users instead of asking them do so much things manually (which I didn't do as obviously I know we develop in small iterations :grin: ). This reminds me years when I was writing apps in Spring, they also require a lot of manual work or lot of configuration properties instead of letting users hit the ground running and customize later.

I respect your preference, I'll look into it and implement it in some way. I need to check how to support client attributes map via config properties.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik 

>I hope I don't misinterpret it, but grok is: let them do it manually via test resource or (even new) config properties

May be I don't understand it. I see the integration test where a `fully prepared realm` with the spiffe identity provider is used.  And in the docs, I see an advice to users save a json fragment that only has a spiffe fragment to realm file. 

How is it not manual or useful in isolation ? 

Or do we expect users copy that fragment and find the right place in their massive realm file to paste it correctly into ? Is it a good dev experience ?

With options 2 that I suggested users would write a minimum amount of (hopefully mostly) typed Keycloak Admin API code that  they can understand without having to worry about modifying the realm json.

Or we can try option 3 where we support a curated list of identity providers at the configuration level, using enums, example `spiffe` and require a single map property like endpoint address ?  

IMHO it is worth giving these options a try

Author: I'll answer you just so that you know what I meant. Please bear in mind that I accepted your proposal and I'll work on it later today or tomorrow.

> How is it not manual or useful in isolation ?

1. I expect that users create realms using realm jsons and just place there `${SPIFFE_BUNDLE_ENDPOINT}`. If they want to test Keycloak with SPIFFE, they either have one or will have to create one, otherwise how do they proceed. I doubt they will write admin client java code, because they would have to run it everywhere (when creating dev/stage/production environment etc.).
2. If Keycloak dev svc knows about SPIFFE dev svc (or vice versa), both started, we will be able to detect `quarkus.keycloak.devservices.feature=spiffe` and if there is no custom realm json, we can just preconfigure default realm. I didn't do that, because I knew it was too much, but that would rely on mechanism established in this PR.

> Or do we expect users copy that fragment and find the right place in their massive realm file to paste it correctly into ?

I do, because this way, they will have something more practical then java code they need to run on each startup.

>  Is it a good dev experience ?

It is terrible, I am lost whenever I need to deal with realm json. If we rely on Admin client, how will be users able to progress to realm json though, without that env variable? They will have to start SPIRE locally first, then create final version of realm json and start Quarkus.

Author: ah, sorry, I didn't read it full, I am in bit of a hurry ATM, just:

> Or we can try option 3 where we support a curated list of identity providers at the configuration level, using enums, example spiffe and require a single map property like endpoint address ?

I like that

Author: > With options 2 that I suggested users would write a minimum amount of (hopefully mostly) typed Keycloak Admin API code that they can understand without having to worry about modifying the realm json.

If you are referring to that example of a test resource they c&p, agreed, it is quick way to start. I also mentioned these comments about how to proceed to realm json with that later.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik 

If we are talking about some existing realm then we can expect users have it all already configured (I guess in the Keycloak dashboard). I'm not sure yet what do we do it about it - we don't know about their Spiffe configuration - may be we can somehow advise them to make the endpoint address set in the env var to use the local devservice, and in the future we would offer a real heavy-weight devservice support loading RedHat one.

>It is terrible, I am lost whenever I need to deal with realm json. 

So, then we should let users avoid dealing with it, right ?

>If we rely on Admin client, how will be users able to progress to realm json though, without that env >variable? They will have to start SPIRE locally first, then create finl version of realm json and start Quarkus.

My understanding that so far, we only look at aligning it with the lightweight container, so it is a realm that is created at the startup. And as suggested in one of another comments, if it is a lightweight spiffe client dev service, then it should be aligned with the devmode host/port - so all is known to setup the spiffe identity provider

Author: Okay, no problem. I'll try it.

{
  "realm": "my-spiffe-realm",
  "sslRequired": "none",
  "identityProviders": [{
    "alias": "spiffe-idp",
    "providerId": "spiffe",
    "enabled": true,
    "config": {
      "trustDomain": "spiffe://test.quarkus.io",
      "bundleEndpoint": "${SPIFFE_BUNDLE_ENDPOINT}"
    }
  }],
  "clients": [{
    "clientId": "my-app",
    "publicClient": false,
    "serviceAccountsEnabled": true,
    "clientAuthenticatorType": "federated-jwt",
    "redirectUris": ["*"],
    "attributes": {
      "jwt.credential.issuer": "spiffe-idp",
      "jwt.credential.sub": "spiffe://test.quarkus.io/test-workload"
    }
  }]
}
----

Reference the realm file and disable automatic client creation:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.features=spiffe
quarkus.keycloak.devservices.realm-path=my-spiffe-realm.json

> quarkus.keycloak.devservices.create-client=false

Reviewer: Does the keycloak dev service create a default client when the realm path is set ?

Author: > Does the keycloak dev service create a default client when the realm path is set ?

For the default client you cannot configure the SPIFFE identity provider. You can do it later I guess via Admin client and/or in a test resource.
